Feature/timescaledb plugin (#15)
intelie/gitbook-platform: featured-plugins/timescaledb.md

---
description: TimescaleDB expands PostgreSQL for time series and analytics.
---

# TimescaleDB

## TimescaleDB Plugin

TimescaleDB plugin is built over PostgreSQL and handles relentless streams of time-series data with the performance, scalability, and usability that the application needs.

This document provides an overview of the new timescaledb plugin and the features of the recently released 1.5.0 version.
In addition, it describes the features planned for the upcoming version.

> TimescaleDB plugin was designed with two main goals: Improve query performance and reduce storage costs, when compared to other Intelie Live Plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TimescaleDB plugin was designed with two main goals: Improve query performance and reduce storage costs, when compared to other INTELIE Storage Providers.
```

A time field is typically mapped to be the hypertable's time column.

### Chunks

Behind the scenes, the database performs the work of setting up and maintaining the hypertable's partitions.
Those partitions are called "chunks", which is the **smallest portion of data that can be compressed and decompressed**.
The chunks can be considered many child tables, which compose the hypertable.

![Hypertable chunks](<../.gitbook/assets/image (178).png>)

### Compression

Compression reduces the amount of space taken up by your data. For some queries, it also speeds up query time, because fewer bytes need to be read from disk.
TimescaleDB uses native compression for hypertable data. That means it doesn't need a specific file system or extra software. Compression works out-of-the-box.
**Compressed data is stored in a hybrid row-columnar format**. This format works best for older data, which is queried but rarely changed.
Newer, often-changed data should be stored in uncompressed row format.

- Uncompressed Chunk:

![Uncompressed hypertable](<../.gitbook/assets/image (179).png>)

- Compressed Chunk:

![Compressed hypertable](<../.gitbook/assets/image (180).png>)

### Segmentation

> When we compress data, we might choose a column on which the data will be segmented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data compression allows to choose a column on which the data will be segmented by.
```

> We can think of segmentation column as **the way data is grouped when compressed** in TimescaleDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Segment columns define how **the data is grouped when compressed** in TimescaleDB.
```

In other words, each row in a compressed table must contain data about a single item.
The column that a table is segmented by contains only a single entry, while all other columns can have multiple arrayed entries.
For example, if a hypertable is segmented by device ID, this is how the data will be arranged after compressed:

![Segmented hypertable](<../.gitbook/assets/image (181).png>)

Unlike above, each compressed row has information about a single device ID.

> This can be particularly efficient on queries that use the segmentation column in the WHERE clause, because the decompression can happen after filtering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be particularly efficient on queries that use the segment column in the WHERE clause, because the decompression can happen after filtering.
```

> It's important to note that **segmentation columns are not compressed**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to note that **segment columns are not compressed**.
```

> Instead, for each value of the segmentation column, a separate compressed row is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, for each value of the segment column, a separate compressed row is created.
```

## Hypertable's Management

> With TimescaleDB plugin, the event types can be managed in a specific tab.
> This is pretty much like the event type management in other Live plugins.
> The difference is that each event type is mapped to a hypertable, and come with some additional features are included, like compression management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The event types can be managed in the **Hypertables** tab.
Each INTELIE Live event type is mapped to a hypertable. 
Besides the basic operations to view index details and drop the hypertable, more advanced features are provided for compression, segmentation and chunk listing.
```

![Hypertable Management](<../.gitbook/assets/image (182).png>)

## Index Creation

TimescaleDB plugin also supports index and multi index creation.
They will be used to speed up queries.

![Index Creation](<../.gitbook/assets/image (183).png>)

## Compression

> ### Defining a segmentation column (Optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Defining segment columns (Optional)
```

> To compress a hypertable, we first must configure its segmentation column.
> This is not mandatory, as a hypertable can be compressed without having a segmentation column defined.
> This will cause the compressed data not to be grouped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Segmenting is the very first decision to take before compressing a hypertable.
Once the compression is configured, the segmenting can only be edited by decompressing the entire hypertable again.

The segments are optional since a hypertable can be compressed without it.
In this case, all columns will be grouped.
```

> One important thing to be aware is that **the segmentation column can be configured only before the data is compressed**. Never after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note **the segment columns can be configured only before the data is compressed**. Never after.
```

In order to define a segmentation column for a compressed hypertable, it'll have to be decompressed first.

> ![Defining segmentation column](<../.gitbook/assets/image (184).png>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Defining segment columns](<../.gitbook/assets/image (184).png>)
```

> It's also possible to define a set of segmentation columns for the same hypertable, by separating the with commas like `(device_id, time)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also possible to define a set of segment columns for the same hypertable, by separating the with commas like `(device_id, time)`.
```

### Compressing a hypertable

> After the segmentation column has been defined, the hypertable can be compressed by clicking on the `Compress` button:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the segment columns have been defined, the hypertable can be compressed by clicking on the `Compress` button:
```

![Compressing the hypertable](<../.gitbook/assets/image (185).png>)

### Defining a compression policy

With TimescaleDB plugin, it's also possible to define a compression policy.
This works like a recurrent background process that compresses a specific hypertable after its chunks reaches a given age.

This is useful to avoid recurrent manual compressions on the hypertable, and also to
decrease the space consumed by older data, which are not queried often.

![Compression policy](<../.gitbook/assets/image (186).png>)

## Listing hypertable chunks

After a hypertable is created, it's automatically partitioned into chunks (periods of time).
The chunk interval is actually pre-defined to contain **7 days of data**.

> Supposing we have one month of historical data in a hypertable, the first chunk will contain data from days 1ª to 7º,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, one month of historical data in a hypertable means the first chunk will contain data from days 1 to 7,
```

> the second chunk from days 8º to 14º, and so on. More chunks are automatically created when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the second chunk from days 8 to 14, and so on. More chunks are automatically created when needed.
```

> It's possible to view the created chunks by using the `View Chunks` button, making it also possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's possible to view the chunks created by using the `View Chunks` button, making it also possible
```

> to monitor which chunks are currently compressed or not:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to identify which chunks are currently compressed or not:
```

![Listing chunks](<../.gitbook/assets/image (187).png>)

## What we have achieved and what we can expect

> ### TimescaleDB against PostgreSQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### TimescaleDB vs Vanilla PostgreSQL
```

In our experiments we have successfully **reduced the storage size by up to 93%** when compared to the equivalent dataset on PostgreSQL plugin.

> While in plain PostgreSQL the data occupied 36.67 GB, using TimescaleDB the spaced consumed decreased to 2.88 GB (with the hypertable fully compressed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While in plain PostgreSQL the data occupied 36.67 GB, using TimescaleDB the space consumed decreased to 2.88 GB (with the hypertable fully compressed).
```

> ### TimescaleDB against MongoDB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### TimescaleDB vs MongoDB
```

> Our experiments also showed that the storage size was **reduced by up to 59%** when compared to the same dataset on MongoDB plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our experiments also demonstrated that the storage size was **reduced by up to 59%** when compared to the same dataset on MongoDB.
```

While in plain MongoDB the data occupied 226 GB, using TimescaleDB the spaced consumed decreased to 92.49 GB (with the hypertable fully compressed).

In addition, for some queries, we were able to obtain a **performance gain of up to 38%**.

> ### Important Considerations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Remarks
```

While the storage cost will much likely reduce by using TimescaleDB plugin, the query performance will depend on a few other factors.

> The size of the chunk interval, segmentation columns, created indexes, data ordering,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The size of the chunk interval, segment columns, created indexes, data ordering,
```

At the moment (version 1.5.0), it's not possible to decompress a hypertable using the UI.
We are working on it to add a decompression button to the hypertable management tab.

#### Async job management (2.0.0)

Currently, except from the compression policy, the manual compression and segmentation actions
are performed synchronously.
If a hypertable is large enough, the compression process could take a lot of time to finish,
and there isn't a way for the user to keep track of the compression/segmentation/decompression progress.

In this sense, we are developing a functionality that will allow the registration of asynchronous jobs
to manage these tasks, making them clearer for the user.

## Requirements

Currently, the TimescaleDB plugin requires a TimescaleDB 2.5+ extension to work properly.

## Recommended Reading

We recommend the reading of the following articles in order to better understand TimescaleDB:

- [Time series Data](https://www.timescale.com/blog/time-series-data/)
- [Installation how-to](https://docs.timescale.com/install/latest/)
- [Getting started](https://docs.timescale.com/getting-started/latest/)
- [Overview](https://docs.timescale.com/timescaledb/latest/)

> - [API reference](https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/]) (for administrators)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [API reference](https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/) (for administrators)
```

data characteristics, aggregations, as well as data distribution are parameters to be considered
that should interfere with the good or poor performance of a query.

In our experiments, TimescaleDB has shown to extract a lot of performance in queries with heavy aggregations over time series.

### Future plans and releases

#### Support to decompression using the UI (1.6.0)

At the moment (version 1.5.0), it's not possible to decompress a hypertable using the UI.
We are working on it to add a decompression button to the hypertable management tab.

#### Async job management (2.0.0)

Currently, except from the compression policy, the manual compression and segmentation actions
are performed synchronously.
If a hypertable is large enough, the compression process could take a lot of time to finish,
and there isn't a way for the user to keep track of the compression/segmentation/decompression progress.

In this sense, we are developing a functionality that will allow the registration of asynchronous jobs
to manage these tasks, making them clearer for the user.

## Requirements

Currently, the TimescaleDB plugin requires a TimescaleDB 2.5+ extension to work properly.

> ## Recommended Reading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## References
```

> We recommend the reading of the following articles in order to better understand TimescaleDB:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend the reading of the following articles from official TimescaleDB:
```
